---
title: "How-should-britain-handle-the-dragon-in-the-east"
author: "Lily Cornell"
date: 2022-01-30T1:51:10-04:00
categories: ["politics"]
moods: ["Should Britain cut ties with China?"]
---
China has one of the worst human rights records in the world.  More than a million of its Uighur Muslims are held in‘re-education’ camps. There are 1,438 documented political prisoners, though Amnesty International believes there are very many more.  China is one of the world’s most enthusiastic users of the death penalty - 24, 466 people were executed in 2014 alone. It is believed that the state harvests the organs of executed prisoners.  International monitors report that there are more than 150 different torture techniques used routinely within Chinese prisons. Despite the ending of the ‘one child’ policy, women are still being forcibly sterilised.  All of these abuses are widely known by the international community. So,  has the United Kingdom, the world’s oldest continuous democracy, a nation rightly proud of its freedom, rule of law and support for human rights, allowed itself to become too dependent on the China?  

Quite simply, it’s money.  China is the second largest source of non-EU imports to the UK just behind the United States.  This figure is growing year on year.  China produces almost all of the consumer items we take for granted. From clothes to electronics, to electrical goods and furniture. We can’t get enough cheap stuff from China.  People might complain about the demise of this country’s manufacturing industry and claim they want to buy British, but the fact is that Chinese goods are cheap. Almost everything we use in our day-to-day lives is manufactured in China, but not always ethically, and it is all because we are greedy.

China is a growing economy and it has a middle class made up of hundreds of millions of people who have money to spend on our products and services.  China sends more than 120,000 students to our universities every year. The money paid by these students keeps our universities afloat. The Chinese government also pays for universities to set up ‘Confucius Institutes’ which supposedly promote Chinese culture and learning in the west.  However, we know that this support comes at a price to the freedom of the university. Over the past couple of years, there have been numerous stories about how the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) has interfered in the running of UK universities and demanded that certain issues are not taught, such as the independence of Taiwan or Tibet. There are other reports about the CCP supporting Chinese students to form political opposition groups on university campuses to prevent demonstrations about Hong Kong.

Black Lives Matter (BLM) protests are being held all over the UK, attracting thousands of people. Of course racism is disgusting and must not be tolerated in our country, however, there is a deep-rooted hypocrisy in our society. It is easy to ‘take the knee’ or wave a BLM placard, but shining the light on China’s brutal regime and disrespect for human life would  mean protesters  giving up cheap products. It is ironic that BLM protesters stand around in the street scrolling away on their iPhones which are made in China by people working in abusive conditions, according to international monitors.  The protesters are also probably wearing cheap Primark clothes made in south Asian sweat shops owned and operated by the Chinese.
  
It’s not just the greedy consumers of the western world who turn a blind eye to the abusive Chinese regime though. Big companies like Google, Apple and Facebook all collude with the CCP in order to get access to their lucrative market. If these companies upset the CCP, they will find themselves blacklisted.  Google, Apple and Facebook alter their software for Chinese users to prevent certain information from appearing, such as news about the Hong Kong protests or reporting of the Tiananmen Square massacre.   All of us who use these tech giants are therefore complicit in the control of information to Chinese people.

TikTok is massively popular all over the UK. How many people know that it is Chinese owned? All of our personal data is being hoovered up and sent back to China. It is well known that there is no such thing as a fully private company in China. The law says that the government can require companies to comply with any request.  If the Chinese government having access to your mindless selfies doesn’t seem important to you, then how about a threat to our national security? The UK government is proposing to introduce 5G into the UK, and for this, the best value provider of the essential technology is Huawei.  No western country has yet developed the necessary technology so if we want to go 5G, we need to do business with Huawei.  While Huawei is a private company, security experts are very worried about the risk of interference from the CCP.  The UK government claims that Huawei, which it describes as a ‘high risk vendor’, will be kept away from the sensitive core parts of the network. However, where there is a will there is a way, and China will always find a way. If we were to let Huawei have even a small role in the 5G network system it could be catastrophic to our nation’s most secret information, such as the SAS and the Secret Society.

We have known that China was evil for many years but we ignored it because it didn’t really affect us. We benefited from a growing Chinese economy and we allowed ourselves to shrug and think the oppressive regime was not really our problem. The coronavirus pandemic has shown us our mistake.  The cover-up of the virus in China allowed it to spread. Our reliance on China for so many of our medical supplies and other essential items meant that we weren’t able to respond quickly enough to meet the demand of the virus.   We can’t trust China and we can’t continue to turn a blind eye to its abuse of its own citizens. As we recover from coronavirus, now is the time for us to re-set our relationship with China.
